Title: Socioeconomic Influences on Gun Violence
Authors: Alex Rand and Patrick McNally
Date: 12/20/2021

Executive Summary: Gun violence is a national public health epidemic that exacts a substantial toll on U.S. society. Despite increasing efforts by the U.S. government and local policymakers, 2021 is on pace to be the worst year for gun violence in decades, surpassing even the high levels last year. Therefore we decided to look into various socioeconomic factors across US counties and analyze which variables were most predictive of fatal gun incidence rates from 2013 to 2018. 					
Our dataset pulled data from two sources, the first of which being a GitHub repository containing all violent gun incidents from January 1, 2013 until March 3, 2018. Our second data source was  a dataset called county_complete from the R package tidycensus that consists of 188 socioeconomic and demographic variables for each of the 3142 counties in the United States. We realized that many of the rows in the gun violence dataset did not use the name of the county as the location. Instead, we used the latitude and longitude coordinates in each row to fetch the FIPS code for the county in which the incident happened, which required the use of the government’s publicly available geolocation API. Our explanatory variables span various measures of socioeconomic status including the age, ethnicity, and income level of each county among other variables. Our primary response variable of interest is the cumulative annual violent gun incident rate per capita, calculated as the average number of violent gun crimes per year from 2014 until 2017 divided by the population of the county. 

Before exploring our data or creating any models, we split our data into a training dataset and a test dataset, using the test dataset to assess and compare the performance of our models. We then explored our data to evaluate the correlations between our explanatory variables as well as between variables and the response. To create the model with optimal predictive performance, we then built eight different cross-validated models: intercept-only, ordinary least squares, ridge regression, LASSO regression, elastic net regression, regression tree, random forest, and boosting. Of the regression models, ordinary least squares had the lowest test error and of the tree-based models, the random forest model had the lowest test error. The random forest had the lowest test error overall as well.

Unsurprisingly, we found that the ordinary least squares regression and random forest both signified similar variables as the strongest predictors of violent gun incidence rates. Our random forest model denoted that the variables related to the poverty level of a county as well as the percentage of the population that was African American were the most significant predictors. We hope our analysis can inform and improve social and economic policies aimed at improving the gun violence epidemic in the country today.
